---
title: "The beautiful world of random numbers"
date: 2019-11-2
tags: [random numbers]
header:
  image: "/images/rally/title.png"
  teaser: "/images/animation/time_series.gif"
excerpt: "Random numbers generated from physical processes are vital our current mode of communication that
relies on the transmission of data through computer systems and networks. Our daily activities like
sending emails, browsing social media, online banking and shopping depend on these
telecommunication platforms and the world wide web secured by random numbers."
mathjax: true

---
<div id="fb-root"></div>
<script async defer src="https://connect.facebook.net/en_US/sdk.js#xfbml=1&version=v3.2"></script>


All of us encountered chance in one way or another. That guilty moment when guessing in a multiple-
choice exam, that heart-throbbing suspense when hoping that you draw your crush'’s name in the class
Christmas exchange gift, that spin the bottle game of truth or dare when drinking with friends, or even
that simple coin toss whether to eat out or not. Chance is entangled to our lives but ironically, most of
us find it hard to grasp or understand [1].


First time students of statistics and even novice teachers admit that statistics is a difficult field of study
as it go against common intuition [2]. In real life situations, most people feel uncomfortable when
confronted with the concept of randomness. There is this tendency to believe that things happen for a
reason and that there must be an explanation for the present state of things. These sentiments can be
traced back to the earliest writings and theological teachings of almost all civilizations [3].


Operational mathematics, in its manner and form, is largely based from the axioms, theorems and
propositions of the ancient Greeks. They did not pioneer rigid mathematical treatment of the theory of
randomness because; First, they believe that the future is governed by the will of gods. Second, they
believe on absolute truth proved by logical assumptions. And third, their number system is impractical
for calculations with fractions and non-positive numbers. These would imply that probabilities and
chance would be irrelevant and an impossibility for them [4].


The first advancement in the theory of randomness came much later when a medical doctor turned
gambler Gerolamo Cardano wrote a book titled ‘Book on the Games of Chance’ that depicts strategies
in playing card games, backgammon, and a primitive dice called the astragali [4]. This work by
Cardano became the basis of the works of Galileo Galilei (equiprobability of tossing three dice), Blaise
Pascal (fundamental counting theory and concept of mathematical expectation) and Jacob Bernoulli
(law of large numbers) [1].

Another notable contribution to the theory if randomness was from an Englishman shopkeeper by the
name of John Graunt. In his book ‘Natural and Political Observations Made Upon The Bills of
Mortality’, he was able to predict accurately the mortality rates of London in a 'normal' year and also
the number of casualties of a particular disease or incident [3].


From these insights in gambling and population dynamics, started our 'confidence' that even
randomness follows certain rules. The theory of randomness peaked interest and became central in the
study of thermodynamics and quantum theory.


At the time, early scientists used draw balls from a 'well-stirred' urn for their random numbers.
Eventually, tables of random numbers generated from census reports where published but where
deemed inadequate for large sampling experiments [6]. Over the years, much of the development was
focused on producing large scale random numbers and at a faster rate through deterministic
mathematical algorithms.


Humanity has been using random numbers since antiquity. In ancient Egypt, chance have been used to
divide property, delegate civic responsibilities or privileges, settle disputes among neighbors, device
strategies in battle, and drive the play in games [1]. Often they use randomness to ensure fairness, to
prevent dissension, and to acquire divine direction.


Modern times have changed a lot, and random numbers are becoming more essential to most of our
technologies. Many areas in physics require simulations of natural phenomena and physical systems.
For a more realistic rendering, random numbers are often needed. In the field of statistics, random
sampling is often necessary to obtain a generalization of the population.


Exhaustive numerical problems often require large amount of random numbers to crunch and brute
force all possible solutions. One of such application is the Monte Carlo method which consists of
simulation techniques that uses large amount of random numbers [7]. This method has vast applications
in calculating definite integrals, systems of equations or mathematical models in higher dimensions.


Current high-definition movies and video games rely mostly on the realistic rendering of characters and
scenes. Random numbers are often used to identify parameter values in which the rendering will fit
observations in natural systems. One example is the Disney movie ‘Frozen’. The producers based the
simulations of the snow dynamics on a hybrid Eulerian/Lagrangian Material Point Method in which
simulation parameters like the number of snow particles in a grid were chosen at random.


Complex systems in economics, sociology, and politics often need strategic analysis for decision
making. These systems and their analysis can be understood better by using ‘game theory’. Game
theory is a congregate of models where a game is any competitive activity in which players contend
with each other according to a set of rules [8]. Examples include political candidates vying for votes,
court judges deciding on a case, animals fighting for a prey etc. Random numbers are central to the
simulations involved in game theory for it is necessary to exhaust all possible outcomes in a game and
optimize the decision process.


Computer algorithms often require random numbers to test its robustness. Of particular interest is its
application in cryptography which aims to ensure the integrity and security of data. Branching to the
applications of cryptography, modern ideas on innovating monetary and banking systems are starting to
take place. Cryptocurrency has become of particular interest for the decentralization of banks and other
financial institutions. The process involves person to person transactions which are recorded via a
public ledger monitored by individuals called ‘miners’ [9]. As a result transaction fees and product
prices becomes lower and since the currency transcends national boundaries, it can be used
everywhere. Of particular interest to the implementation of cryptocurrencies would include
environmental and sustainability factors as there will be a reduction of our need of paper bills and
metallic coins.


For a start, there is no such thing as a random number [6]. Rather we think of random numbers as a
‘sequence’ and not just a single number. Whether a number belongs to a random sequence is entirely
dependent to the previous and the next numbers. Generating random numbers is no easy task [10].
Generally, random number generators are classified based on how they are generated. The types
include, Pseudo Random Number Generators (PRNGs), Cryptographically Secure Random Number
Generators (CSRNGs) and True Random Number Generators (TRNGs).


If the random number generator looks random and passes many standardized statistical tests of
randomness, then it can be classified as a PRNG. This type of generator rely on mathematical
algorithms to generate random numbers. The numbers produced possess the same statistical properties
of ‘real’ random numbers. PRNGs are characterized by being deterministic as they are governed by a
particular function. PRNGs are also periodic since they use bounded memories. Applications that uses
PRNGs almost always require algorithms that produces random numbers of long periods. Some even
uses $2^{256}$ or higher [11]. PRNGs are useful for simulations but definitely not for cryptographic
applications [12].


If a random number generator produces random numbers that looks random and is unpredictable, then
it is classified a CSRNG. Basically, it is like the PRNGs that use deterministic algorithm to generate
numbers but does not leak any information about the next number [11]. Examples include the
CSPRNGs of Unix-based operating systems (OS) called block devices: /dev/random and /dev/urandom.
These two are system files where the operating system pools random OS-dependent events such as
system clock, elapsed time between keystrokes or mouse movement, and other physical noise sources
[10].





Want to collaborate? Message me in [LinkedIn](https://ph.linkedin.com/in/albertyumol).


References:

[1] T. Park, etal. [Semantic Image Synthesis with Spatially Adaptive Normalization.](https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.07291)

[2] A. King. [Photos from Crude Sketches: NVIDIA's GauGAN Explained Visually.](https://adamdking.com/blog/gaugan/)



<script async src="//pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/js/adsbygoogle.js"></script>
<script>
  (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({
    google_ad_client: "ca-pub-6410209740119334",
    enable_page_level_ads: true
  });
</script>

<div class="fb-comments" data-href="https://albertyumol.github.io/" data-numposts="5"></div>
